Hello, everyone, welcome back to the 10 days of JavaScript.
Here we are in day number two.
And in this lesson, we're going to learn about functions.
So we will answer the question, what is a function?
However, before we get to that, let's first talk about where we are going to type our code in this
lesson.
So in our previous lesson, we learned how to open up the Web browsers console.
Right.
So remember, you can right.
Click on a Web page, choose, inspect, and that opens up your developer tools.
And then you just look for the tab or button that's named console, OK?
Remember in the previous lesson we learned how to type down here, two plus two press enter.
We see for now the console is great for experimenting and typing out these single lines of code and
then pressing enter.
But in the real world, you're going to want to write multiple lines of code at once, meaning when
you push enter, you don't want the computer to execute or run your code right away.
So almost like a word processing document with multiple sentences and paragraphs, we want to be able
to write out multiple lines of JavaScript code and then have the computer run everything that we just
typed.
Now, the easiest way to get started practicing this is actually not the console, but instead a website
named Code Pen.
And right now, I want you to follow along with me so you can either Google for code pen or you can
just visit the address, which is code pen dot I.
So right now, this very minute, I want you to pause this lesson if you need to, while you go open
code pen in a new tab so you can follow along.
In my opinion, code pen is the easiest way to get started.
Actually writing code it's free to use and if you do not want to, you don't even have to create or
sign up for an account.
You can literally just come to this website and click the create button.
Should be somewhere towards the top.
Right.
And then from this menu that appears, choose the new pen option.
So create new pen.
OK, so what's going on now?
What is this screen?
Well, each pen that we create is like an empty canvas or a playground or playpen or an experiment where
we can code.
So we see that there are three columns.
The first is each HTML.
And then success and then J.S. or JavaScript.
Now, this is a course that is focused on JavaScript, so we are not going to worry too much about these
first two columns.
But the big picture idea is that these are the three languages that Web pages are created with.
And how code pen works is that as you type in a column, let me shrink this.
You can actually see as you type in a column.
So in the HTML column, if I say hello there, as soon as I stop typing for a second, a preview is
shown to me down here of what my code creates.
Perfect.
Except this is not a course on each HTML.
We want to learn about JavaScript.
So just to make it really easy to focus on JavaScript for right now, why don't we hide the HTML and
CSS columns?
So to do that, all I did was drag on the border.
Right.
This vertical line right between success and JavaScript, hover over that and then click and drag to
the left.
So that way the JavaScript column takes up most of our screen.
Right, because that's the language that we want to practice.
Cool.
Now, you do not need to do that.
It just gives you more room as we're going to be typing in this column.
So we now have a perfect environment to start practicing because in this JavaScript column, we can
now type out multiple lines and just keep pressing enter.
And each time we type a bit of new code, the computer is going to execute everything that we wrote
all at once together, just like an actual real world computer program.
OK, now, having said all of that, let's get back to the actual goal of this particular lesson.
Right.
And that is the topic of functions.
So what in the world is a function?
Well, I like to think of functions as action words.
So if we were comparing JavaScript to a language like English or Spanish, a function would be a verb.
So, for example, if our pet dog was a computer that spoke JavaScript, we could say run or jump or
sit.
So you simply type out the name of the action or the name of the function, and then you include a pair
of parentheses.
However, let's be realistic.
Our Web browser is not a dog, so it can't run, jump or sit, but it can do web browser ish things.
So, for example, let's delete these three lines of code and we can create an annoying pop up by calling
the browsers alert function.
So alert and then parentheses and we can see this pop up appears.
So this is how you can alert the visitor of the site with a message.
Right.
So if you really want to get their attention, you can include a custom message right about here.
So let's go ahead and click the button to dismiss the alert pop up.
And within the parentheses for this alert, we can include quotes and then say, hey.
And here you can see in the new Pop-Up, there is our custom message cool.
Let's go ahead and close or dismiss this pop up.
So the idea is that within the parentheses, you can pass along a bit of data to the function and it's
up to the function as to how it uses that data.
So back to the dog example, right?
If our dog spoke JavaScript, we could say jump and maybe first we want to tell the dog to jump high,
but then we could also tell the dog to jump again and maybe this time jump low.
So to review, you can call a function simply by including the word and then parentheses and then inside
the parentheses, we can pass along a bit of data.
The technical name for a piece of data that we pass along is an argument.
So altogether we are calling or executing the browser's alert function and we are passing it an argument
of, hey, OK, so the browser has these different action words or functions like alert that we can
call.
But we are not limited to only those functions because just like you can teach a dog a new trick, we
can also teach our JavaScript environment new tricks by creating our own brand new functions.
So, for example, let's get rid of this line.
And if I type out, greet and then parentheses, the web browser does not know what this means.
The browser does not have a function named greet.
So when I say greet and then parentheses, this would be like telling a dog to bake a cake.
It's not going to know what you mean and it's just going to look at you funny.
However, as a programmer, we can create our own brand new function named Greet and we simply explain
what that action or function should do.
And then it will be added to the browser's vocabulary.
And we can use or call it just like we would alert or any of the built in functions.
So the question becomes, how do we create a function?
Right.
We've learned how to call or execute or run a function.
This is how you issue a command.
You simply type the name of the function and then parentheses.
But how do you actually create the recipe or the instructions or the logic for the function?
Well, let me show you.
So let's start fresh and we begin by typing the word function and then a space and then we get to make
up whatever name we want for our new function.
The name does not matter.
You could call it pizza or unicorn, but in this case, I'm going to name it greet.
Then we include a pair of parentheses and then after the parentheses we include a pair of curly brackets.
If you're not familiar with these characters, you can create them by holding the shift key and then
pressing the key directly to the right of the pecky.
OK, and now you don't have to do this, but in between the two curly brackets, I like to push, enter
or return and drop down to a new line like this just for visual clarity.
OK, but in between the curly brackets where my cursor is blinking right now, this is what is referred
to as the body of the function.
And this is where we are free to do just about anything.
So this is where we explain what the function should actually do.
So just as a quick test, let's set things up so that when you call or run the greet function, an alert
popup should appear that says, hello, my name is and then whatever your name is.
So inside the curly brackets, let's call the alert function and say hello, my name is.
And then you could put your name instead of my name.
All right.
And now you might be wondering why an alert pop up message is not appearing right away.
And it's because all we've done here is describe the function or define the function.
So this is the recipe for our new greet action.
And now if we want it to actually happen, if we want to tell the browser to actually perform the function,
maybe down here we could just say greet and then parentheses.
Right.
That's how you call a function.
And there we can see the pop up appears.
Hello, my name is Brad and if we called the function again, we call again grippe second time, it
should appear twice.
So here it is once I click.
OK, there it is a second time.
Perfect.
So we just taught the browser a new trick, a new action, or we should say a new function.
Now, before we move on, let's improve our function because it would be nice if it was flexible.
Let me explain what I mean by that.
So follow along with me.
Let's delete these two function calls for Gry.
And remember when I used the.
For example, that a dog can jump, but you could also tell it to jump high or to jump low.
And we learned that the data you pass within the parentheses is referred to as an argument.
Right.
And it's up to the function to perhaps use that data in some way.
Well, wouldn't it be cool if our greet function was flexible?
And when you called it, you could pass in a name instead of hard coding the name right here?
So, for example, wouldn't it be neat if we could, say, greet and pass it a value of John and then
it would say, hello, my name is John.
And then you could call it again and say, greet with a value of Jane and then it would say, hello,
my name is Jane.
So let me show you how we can set that up.
I'm going to go ahead and delete these two function calls so code pen doesn't drive me insane and keep
showing those pop ups after every keystroke.
OK, so back to the task at hand.
How can we make this function flexible?
Well, it starts with these parentheses right after the name of our function within these parentheses.
Let's type the letter X. I'm just making that up because it's easy to type.
But you could also say the name or pizza or unicorn or anything.
So by including this here, we have created a parameter named X and we can use this parameter within
the body of the function.
Let me show you what that means.
So down here where we would actually run or call the function.
I'm going to place a cigar right in front of it to comment it out, I'm only doing this so Code Penn
doesn't try to show the pop up after every couple of keystrokes.
But the idea is within the parentheses for our function.
We call it if we include quotes and a name.
So great, John, this data that we're passing along, John, we want to be able to access that within
our function, within the body of our function.
So by including X here as a parameter X is going to equal the value of whatever gets passed in.
So in this case, it would be John.
So now within the body of our function, we can use that to type this out with me.
Let's get rid of your name here.
So just have hello, my name is Space and then the quote and then let's say plus.
X and then let's also add on quotes and a closing period to close out the sentence.
So now down here, if we removed the two forward slashes, the browser or code pen will not actually
run or execute it again.
And here we see.
Hello, my name is John, and again, we don't need to use X as the parameter.
So up in our function definition, within these parentheses, we could say the name and then within
the body of our function, we would just say instead of X the name.
And it works just the same.
OK, so it's a review down here we are calling our Greek function.
We are passing it an argument of John.
And then within our function definition, we've included a matching parameter named the one name that's
going to temporarily store that value and then we can use it however we want.
So down here, we could call the Greek function again and say greet and pass it the value of Jane.
So when our code runs, we see the first one for John click, OK, there's the one for Jane.
Perfect.
Now, before we move on, I want to show you that you can pass along multiple arguments when you call
a function.
Let me show you what I mean.
But first, let's comment out these two lines with Eglash.
Just a code pen doesn't drive us insane with the alerts each time we modify the function, OK?
And let's assume that we want to change our grep function to now include the person's favorite color.
So, hello, my name is blank and then let's say plus.
Pair of quotes, space, and my favorite color is.
Space, and then let's plus fav color and then add in the quotes for the closing period, OK, and then
how would we use this?
Well, down in the function calls when we say greet and give it a value of John, after the quotes,
we can just say comma and pass along a second argument.
So let's say John's favorite color is blue and then with Jane after her quotes, comma, and let's say
her favorite color is green.
Now, if we're including two arguments when we call the function, we want to be sure that we include
two parameters up in the function definition.
So the first thing that gets passed and is done name and then up here we could say comma, fav color.
Right, because that's the name that I chose right here.
So as soon as I remove these forward slashes to uncommented out our code, we see.
Hello, my name is John.
My favorite color is Blue.
And hello, my name is Jane and my favorite color is green.
Perfect.
Now practice makes perfect.
So before we bring this lesson to a close, I want to write one more function with you.
So first I'm going to comment about these two lines so code pen doesn't keep showing me those pop ups.
OK, and right below that, down here, let's create a function named Triple Me, or you could do double
me or quadruple me.
But let's set up a function so that when you pass it a number, maybe it triples that number.
So imagine we could say triple me and then as the argument, just give it a number of five and we would
expect this function to return a value of fifteen.
So let's walk through this.
So first we create the function definition or the recipe for the function.
So let's say function space and then the name you can make one up.
I'm calling it triple me and then parentheses and then after the parentheses curly brackets.
OK, now within the parentheses, right after triple my, let's include X as a parameter and now we
can use that within the body of the function.
Now I do want to let you know that within the body of our function we do not need to call a browser
function like alert instead.
Actually a function in its purest form simply returns a value.
So let's say return and then what do we want to return?
Well, the function is named tripple me, so why don't we just say three and then asterisk for multiplication
and then whatever number is getting passed in through the argument and parameter.
Right.
In this case I chose X, OK, and then let's test this function out.
So down here, let's create a variable that stores a number.
So let's say let my favorite number equal and then let's use our function, let's say triple me.
Right.
We're calling or executing the function and let's pass it a value of twelve, OK?
And then finally, we want to test things to make sure that it's actually working.
So finally, let's just alert out the value of my favorite number just so we can see it with our own
two eyes.
So finally we can say alert my favorite number.
Perfect.
And there we see thirty six.
Right.
If you triple twelve, you get thirty six.
I know I moved a lot faster for this second example of me, but I just wanted to give you something
to experiment with.
And if you need to watch this part a couple of times, that's OK.
If everything in this lesson was not crystal clear and you're still a bit confused, that's OK.
All you really need to have remembered from this lesson is that there are functions.
You can create a function by saying function jump.
This creates the recipe or the definition for that function and then you are free to run or call that
function wherever you want, however many times you want.
And then of course, we learn that you can pass that data inside the parentheses.
If this concept is even a little bit familiar to you, if it's making even just a little bit of sense,
then you're doing great.
You're right on track and you're ready to move on to the next lesson.
So we just cover functions.
Up next, objects.
So what in the world is an object?
Let's keep our momentum rolling.
Let's answer that question and I will see you in the next lesson.